Add page for each sub-protocol (#23)
ethereum/portal-website: pages/concepts/protocols/portal-sub-protocols/history.md

# History Network

***Note that this network is not yet fully production-ready***

The chain history data consists of historical **block headers**, **block bodies** (transactions and ommer) and **block receipts**.
It is expected that this network will one day allow clients that have pruned historical blocks to retrieve them on-demand from this network, and nodes may be able to use blocks downloaded from the History Network to sync, rather than maintaining a local copy of the blockchain. 

The History Network is a [Kademlia](../kademlia.mdx) DHT that uses the [Portal Wire Protocol](./portal-wire-protocol.md) to establish an overlay network on top of the [Discovery v5](../discovery.mdx) protocol.

> The History Network also provides a [hash accumulator](../../hash-accumulators.mdx) that enables clients to verify that data is from the canonical Ethereum chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The History Network also provides a [hash accumulator](../../hash-accumulators.mdx) that enables clients to verify that a header is at a particular block number in the pre-merge Ethereum mainnet chain.
```

## Data

Portal clients can retrieve the following data types from the History Network:

* Block headers
* Block bodies
    * Transactions
    * Ommers
* Receipts
* Header epoch accumulators (pre-merge only)

### Data Types

#### Block Header

Block header data can include: 
- A `BlockHeaderWithProof`
- A `BlockHeaderProof`
- An `AccumulatorProof`

The `BlockHeaderWithProof` is the actual block header data wrapped in a higher level structure with a Merkle proof demonstrating its inclusion in the canonical Ethereum chain. The proof is of type `BlockHeaderProof`, which is a `Union` that can be either `None` or `AccumulatorProof`. The `header` field in `BlockHeaderWithProof` contains the RLP encoded header encoded as an [SSZ](../ssz.mdx) bytelist.

For pre-merge headers, clients SHOULD NOT accept headers without a proof as there is the `AccumulatorProof` solution available.

> For post-merge headers, there is currently no proof solution and clients SHOULD accept headers without a proof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For post-merge headers, clients SHOULD accept headers without a proof, and determine validity using the Beacon network.
```

Validating headers by beacon is a work in progress, not sure whether that's worth noting here. Hopefully that's on the scale of a couple of months, rather than 6-12 months away...

Block headers are retrieved from the network by specifying a content key generated by concatenating the identifier `0x00` and the target block hash.

#### Block Body

> The block body contains the compelte list of transactions that were included in the block and the list of ommers (blocks produced simultaneously but not included in the canonical chain). The encoding for block bodies changed at the Shanghai upgrade (see [EIP-4895](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4895)), meaning Portal clients now have to detect whether a block is pre-Shanghai or post-Shanghai to determine how they should be decoded. Clients that request block bodies from the History Network execute this sequence of operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The block body contains the complete list of transactions that were included in the block and the list of ommers (blocks produced simultaneously but not included in the canonical chain). The encoding for block bodies changed at the Shanghai upgrade (see [EIP-4895](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4895)), meaning Portal clients now have to detect whether a block is pre-Shanghai or post-Shanghai to determine how they should be decoded. Clients that request block bodies from the History Network execute this sequence of operations:
```

>  need to support multiple encodings for the block body content type. For the time being,

Reviewer: Extra line to delete?

- Receive raw block body content.
- Fetch the block's header from the network.
- Compare header timestamp against `SHANGHAI_TIMESTAMP`.
- Decode the block body using either pre-shanghai or post-shanghai encoding.
- Validate the decoded block body against the roots in the header.

Block bodies are retrieved from the network by specifying a content key generated by concatenating the identifier `0x01` and the target block hash.

#### Receipts

Receipts record the outcome of transactions, including transaction logs. 
Portal provides RLP-encoded receipts as SSZ bytelists.

Receipts are retrieved from the network by specifying a content key generated by concatenating the identifier `0x02` and the target block hash.

See section 4.3.1 in the [yellow paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf)

#### Epoch Accumulator

> Portal clients can request the accumulator hash for any epoch. This is the root hash for a Merkle trie with blocks as leaves and is unique to a specific epoch. Proofs are generated by generating a path from an individual block hash to the epoch root hash. The epoch hashes are aded as leaves in a master accumulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Portal clients can request the accumulator hash for any epoch. This is the root hash for a Merkle trie with blocks as leaves and is unique to a specific epoch. Proofs are generated by generating a path from an individual block hash to the epoch root hash. The epoch hashes are added as leaves in a master accumulator.
```
